These are notes on this video by PowerCert Animated Videos:
https://youtu.be/kDEX1HXybrU
===============================================================================

A firewall is a system that is designed to prevent unauthorized access from
entering a private network by filtering information that comes in from the
Internet. A firewall blocks unwanted traffic and permits wanted traffic.

A firewall's purpose is to create a safety barrier between a private network
and the public Internet, because out on the Internet, there's always going to
be malicious users and traffic that may try to penetrate into a private network
and cause harm. A firewall is the main component on a network to prevent this.

A firewall is especially important to a large organization that has a lot of
computers computers and servers in them. You don't want all those devices 
accessible to everyone on the internet where a hacker can come in and totally
disrupt that organization.

A firewall that's used in computers networks is very similiar to how a firewall
works in a building structure. In fact, that is where the word 'firewall' came
from. A firewall in a building structure provides a barrier so that in the
event of an actual fire, on either side of a building, the firewall is there to
keep it from spreading over to the other side.

So the firewall is there to keep the fire from destroying the entire building.
But if the firewall wasn't there here, the fire would spread to the other side
and the whole building would be destroyed. And a network firewall works in a 
similiar way as a structure firewall. It stops harmful activity before it can
spread into the other side of the firewall and cause harm to a private network.

In today's high-tech world, a firewall is essential to every home and 
especially a business or an organization to keep their network safe. 

A firewall works by filtering the incoming network data and determines by its
rules if it is allowed to enter a network, these rules are also known as an
access control list. These rules are customizable and are determined by the
network administrator. The administrator decides not only what can enter a
network but also what can leave a network. These rules either allow or deny
permissions. So as an example, here we have some rules in a firewall's access
control list:

	Permission	IP Address	Protocol	Dst	Port
	allow	162.213.214.140	TCP	ANY	80
	allow	54.21.66.112	TCP ANY	80
	deny	40.55.130.66	TCP	ANY	80

It shows a list of IP addresses that have been allowed or denied by this 
firewall. Traffic from some IP addresses are allowed to
enter this network, but traffic from IP address has been denied.

So, if traffic from this IP address tried to get into this network, the
firewall will deny it because of the rules that are set in the firewall. But
the other IP addresses are granted access because the rules allow them.

Firewalls don't just make rules based in IP addresses, but they can also make
rules based on domain names, protocols, programs, ports, and keywords. Let's
say in this example, the firewall rules are controlling access by port numbers.
And let's say that the rules have allowed incoming data that's using port
number 80, 25, and 110, and the data using those ports have been given access
to this network. So any incoming data that's using those ports, can pass 
through the firewall. But also in this firewall, the rules have denied any data
that's using port numbers 23 and 3389. So any incoming data that's using those
port numbers, the firewall will deny access and it won't get past the firewall.
So in a nutshell this is how firewalls basically work.

Firewalls come in different types. One type is called a host-based firewall, 
and this is a software firewall. This is the kind of firewall that is installed
on a computer and it protects that computer and nothing else. For example, 
later versions of Microsoft operating systems come pre-packaged with a 
host-based firewall. And you can see that example here. There are also 3rd 
party host-based firewalls that can be purchased and installed on a computer.
For example, Zone Alarm, which is a popular 3rd party host-based firewall. A
lot of antivirus programs will have a built-in host-based firewall. 

Another type of firewall is called a network-based firewall. A network-based
firewall is a combination of hardware and software, and it operates at the
network layer. It is placed between a private network and the public Internet.
But unlike a host-based firewall, where it only protects that computer, a
network-based firewall protects the entire network, and it does through
management rules that are applied to the entire network so that any harmful
activity can be stopped before it reaches the computers. 

Network-based firewalls can be a stand alone product which is mainly used by
large organizations. They can also built-in as a component of a router which
is what a lot of smaller organizations rely on. Or they can also be deployed in
a service provider's cloud infrastructure.

Now, a lot of organizations will use both network-based and host-based of 
firewalls. They will use a network-based firewall to protect the entire network
as a whole and they will also use host-based firewalls for their individual
protection for their computers and servers. And by doing this, it'll ensure 
maximum protection. Because if harmful data just so happens to get passed the
network firewall the host-based firewalls on each computer will be there to 
stop it.
